ICS 2: Consensus Verification (#20)
cosmos/ics: spec/ics-2-consensus-verification/README.md

---

ics: 2
title: Consensus Verification

> stage: proposal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stage: draft
```

(we eliminated the proposal stage)

category: ibc-core
requires: 23
required-by: 3
author: Juwoon Yun <joon@tendermint.com>, Christopher Goes <cwgoes@tendermint.com>
created: 2019-02-25
modified: 2019-04-02

---

## Synopsis

This standard specifies the properties that consensus algorithms of chains implementing IBC are 
expected to satisfy. The properties are needed for efficient and safe verification in the higher

> level protocol abstractions. The algorithm who uses these properties to verify substates of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
level protocol abstractions. The algorithm which uses these properties to verify substates of 
```

another chain is referred to as a "light client".

## Specification

### Motivation

> `Header` defines required properties of the blockchain on the network. The implementors can 

Reviewer: The first sentence is a bit vague - are you talking about the requirements of a summarizable consensus transcript?

> `Header` defines required properties of the blockchain on the network. The implementors can 

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is very confusing. How `Header` defines the properties of the blockchain?

check whether the consensus that they are using is qualified to be connected to the network or 
not. If not, they can modify the algorithm or wrap it with additional logic to make it 
compatible with the specification. It also provides base layer for the protocol that the other 
components can rely on.

### Desired Properties

> * Blockchains, defined as an infinite list of `Header` starting from its genesis, is linear; no 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Blockchains, defined as an infinite list of `Header` starting from a genesis `RootOfTrust`, are linear; no 
```

> conflicting `Header`s can be both validated, thus no data can be rewritten after it has been 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conflicting `Header`s can be both validated, thus no past accumulator roots can be changed after they have been 
```

> committed. Two `Header`s are conflicting when both has same height but not equal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
committed. Two `Header`s are conflicting when they both have the same height but are not equal.
```

* Verifiers can verify future `Header`s using an existing `RootOfTrust`. When the verifier 
validates it, the verified header is in the canonical blockchain.

> * `RootOfTrust`s contains an accumulator root(ICS23) that the other logics can verify whether 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `RootOfTrust`s contains an accumulator root (ICS23) that the downstream logic can use to verify whether
```

> key-value pairs exists or not with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
key-value pairs are present in the state or not.
```

### Technical Specification

#### Definitions

* `RootOfTrust` is a blockchain commit which contains an accumulator root and the requisite 
  state to verify future roots, stored in one blockchain to verify the state of the other.

>   Defined as 3-tuple `(v :: Header -> (Error|RootOfTrust), r :: AccumulatorRoot)`, where

Reviewer 3: 2-tuple?

>   Defined as 2-tuple `(v :: Header -> (Error|RootOfTrust), r :: AccumulatorRoot)`, where

Reviewer: I still think we should define `v :: RootOfTrust -> Header -> Error | RootOfTrust` as a property of the consensus algorithm, not a field in the `RootOfTrust` - we don't need to store the function definition for each root-of-trust.

    * `v` is the verifier, proves child `Header.p` and returns the updated `RootOfTrust`
    * `r` is the `AccumuatorRoot`, used to prove internal state

* `Header` is a blockchain header which provides information to update `RootOfTrust`, 
  submitted to one blockchain to update the stored `RootOfTrust`.

>   Defined as 3-tuple `(p :: HeaderProof, v :: Maybe<Header -> (Error|RootOfTrust)>,

Reviewer: When would we need to update the function `v`? Should we allow that?

Changing the `updateRootOfTrust` function should require a connection version update I think, instead of just being a property of the header.

  r :: AccumulatorRoot)`, where
    * `p` is the commit proof used by `RootOfTrust.v` to verify
    * `v` is the new verifier, if needed to be updated
    * `r` is the new `AccumulatorRoot` which will replace the existing one
 
* `Consensus` is a blockchain consensus algorithm which generates valid `Header`s.

>   Defined as a function `RootOfTrust -> [Transaction] -> Header`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Defined as a function `RootOfTrust -> [Message] -> Header`
```

We're mostly talking about signed messages between validators here.

> * `Blockchain` is a subset of `(Consensus, RootOfTrust, [Header])`, generated 

Reviewer: Tuples can't have subsets, since they aren't sets - what is the set being referred to here?

by a `Consensus`.

#### Requirements

Consensus verification requires the following accumulator primitives with datastructures and
properties as defined in ICS23:

* `AccumulatorRoot`

#### Subprotocols

##### Verifier

> Verifiers prove new `Header` generated from a blockchain. It is expected to prove a `Header` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The verifier algorithm checks that new `Header`s were in fact generated by a blockchain. It is expected to verify a `Header` 
```

> efficiently; more efficiently than replaying `Consensus` logic for given parent `Header` and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
efficiently; far more efficiently than replaying `Consensus` logic for the given parent `Header` and the
```

> transactions. `Header.p` provides the proof that the verifier can use. Verifiers assume the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
list of network messages. `Header.p` provides the proof that the verifier can use. Verifiers assume the
```

following properties will be satisfied for the `Header`s:

1. `Header`s have no more than one direct child
 
* Satisfied if: deterministic safety

> * Possible violation scenario: validator double signing, deep chain reorg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Possible violation scenario: validator double signing, chain reorganization (Nakamoto consensus)
```

> 2. `Header`s have at least one direct child

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. `Header`s eventually have at least one direct child
```

> * Satisfied if: liveness, lightclient verifier continuability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Satisfied if: liveness, light-client verifier continuity
```

* Possible violation scenario: synchronized halt, incompatible hard fork

3. `Header`s' accumulator root are valid transition from the parents'

> * Satisfied if: decentralized block generation, well implemented state machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Satisfied if: correct block generation & state machine
```

"decentralized" is vague

* Possible violation scenario: invariant break, validator cartel

> // XXX: should it be described on the connection spec?

Reviewer: I think we can move this to downstream specs. ICS 3 handles closing a connection on equivocation.

Can you make an issue to discuss the possible challenge period? That's a good idea but we should discuss it a bit first, not sure quite where to put it yet.

If a `Header` is submitted to the chain(and optionally passed some challenge period for fraud 
proof), then it is assured that the packet is finalized so the application logic can process it.
If a `Header` is proven to violate one of the properties, but still can be verified, the tracking 
chain should detect and take action on the event to prevent further impact. See (link for the ICS 
for equivocation and fraud proof) for details.

##### Accumulator Root

`RootOfTrust` contains an accumulator root, which identifies the whole state of the 
corresponding blockchain at the point of time that the commit is generated. It is expected that 

> the verifying inclusion or exclusion of certain data in the accumulator is done efficient. See 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the verifying inclusion or exclusion of certain data in the accumulator can be done efficiently. See 
```

ICS23 for the details about the `AccumulatorRoot`s.

##### Consensus 

> `Consensus` is a blockchain protocol which actually generates a list of `Header` from the latest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Consensus` is a blockchain protocol which actually generates a list of `Header`s from the latest
```

> state and the incoming transactions. While the chains on the network does not directly proving the 

Reviewer: What do you mean by this sentence?

consensus process, it is expected that the consensus algorithms will generate valid `Header`s.

### Example Implementation

> An example blockchain `B` runs on a single operator consensus algorithm, called `Op`. If a 

Reviewer: This is a great example! Do you think we can use at least two or three-letter variable names? It would make it easier to read. e.g. - `Hdr`

block is signed by the operator, then it is valid. The operator signing key can be changed whil 
the chain is running. In that case, the new header stores the updated pubkey. 

`H` contains `LogStore`, which is a list with type of `[bytes]`. The whole state is serialized 
and stored as `AccumulatorRoot`.

#### Consensus

`B` is defined as `(Op, Gen, [C])`. `B` satisfies `Blockchain`:

```
TX = Append(bytes) or ChangeOperator(Pubkey)

function Op(c :: C, txs :: [TX]) returns C {
    store := c.AccumulatorRoot
    newpubkey := c.Pubkey
    foreach tx in txs {
        case Append(data): 
            state = state + data
        case ChangeOperator(pubkey): 
            newpubkey = pubkey
    }
    result := H(newpubkey, store)
    sig := Privkey.Sign()
    return C(sig, result)
}

Gen = H(InitialPubkey, EmptyLogStore)
```

> It is possible that the `[C]` in a `B` can be any member of set `[C]`, but when the `B` is 

Reviewer: Can you explain what you mean here? What is the set `[C]`?

efficiently; far more efficiently than replaying `Consensus` logic for the given parent `Header` and the
list of network messages, idealy in O(1) time. `Header.p` provides the proof that the verifier can use. 
Verifiers assume the following properties will be satisfied for the `Header`s:

1. `Header`s have no more than one direct child
 
* Satisfied if: deterministic safety
* Possible violation scenario: validator double signing, chain reorganization (Nakamoto consensus)

2. `Header`s eventually have at least one direct child

* Satisfied if: liveness, light-client verifier continuity
* Possible violation scenario: synchronized halt, incompatible hard fork

3. `Header`s are generated from the `Consensus`, which ensures valid transition of the state

* Satisfied if: correct block generation & state machine
* Possible violation scenario: invariant break, validator cartel

##### Accumulator Root

`RootOfTrust` contains an accumulator root, which identifies the whole state of the 
corresponding blockchain at the point of time that the commit is generated. It is expected that 
the verifying inclusion or exclusion of certain data in the accumulator can be done efficiently. See 

> ICS23 for the details about the `AccumulatorRoot`s.

Reviewer 4: ICS23 does not mention pubkey (at least currently)

##### Consensus 

`Consensus` is a blockchain protocol which actually generates a list of `Header`s from the latest
state and the incoming transactions. While the chains on the network does not directly proving the 
consensus process, it is expected that the consensus algorithms will generate valid `Header`s.

### Example Implementation

An example blockchain `B` runs on a single operator consensus algorithm, called `Op`. If a 
block is signed by the operator, then it is valid. The operator signing key can be changed while
the chain is running. In that case, the new header stores the updated pubkey. 

> `H` contains `LogStore`, which is a list with type of `[bytes]`. The whole state is serialized 

Reviewer 4: Not clear what LogStore is...

Author: I will change the example to a simple KVStore, which seems more appropriate

and stored as `AccumulatorRoot`

#### Consensus

`B` is defined as `(Op, Gen, [H])`. `B` satisfies `Blockchain`:

```
TX = Append(bytes) or ChangeOperator(Pubkey)

function commit(h :: H, txs :: [TX]) returns C {
    store := c.AccumulatorRoot
    newpubkey := c.Pubkey

    foreach tx in txs:
        case Append(data): 

>             state = state + data

Reviewer 5: I might be confused here, but are `store` and `state` supposed to be the same thing?

Author: Yes, fixed!

---

ics: 2
title: Consensus Verification
stage: draft
category: ibc-core
requires: 23, 24
required-by: 3
author: Juwoon Yun <joon@tendermint.com>, Christopher Goes <cwgoes@tendermint.com>
created: 2019-02-25
modified: 2019-04-29

---

## Synopsis

This standard specifies the properties that consensus algorithms of chains implementing IBC are

> expected to satisfy. The properties are needed for efficient and safe verification in the higher

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expected to satisfy. These properties are needed for efficient and safe verification in the higher
```

> level protocol abstractions. The algorithm which uses these properties to verify substates of

Reviewer: ^ should be defined

another chain is referred to as a "light client verifier", and pairing it with a state that the

> verifier have to trust forms a "light client".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
verifier trusts forms a "light client".
```

> This standard also specifics how the light clients will be stored, registered, and updated on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This standard also specifies how the light clients will be stored, registered, and updated on a
```

> blockchain. The stored lightclient instances will be able to be verified by a thrid party actor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blockchain. The stored light client instances will be able to be verified by a third party actor, such as a user inspecting the state of the chain.
```

> ## Specification

Reviewer: OK, I agree with this - ref https://github.com/cosmos/ics/issues/84

### Motivation

> Light clients are the verification method of IBC protocol. One chain can track another chain's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the IBC protocol, a chain needs to be able to verify updates to the state of another chain. A light client is the algorithm with which they can do so.
```

> updating state with a light client pointing to that chain. This standard formalises the common

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This standard formalizes the common
```

to be honest, I think you can delete the rest of this paragraph

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

> updating state with a light client pointing to that chain. This standard formalises the common

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

model of light client to minimise the dependency on consensus algorithms, so the protocol can

> easily connect with new chains which are running new consensus algorithms, without need to

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

upgrade the light client protocol itself.

<!--
`FullNode`s are procedures running a `Consensus`. Given a `([Transaction], Commit)`, a
`FullNode` can compute the result `ConsensusState` that the `Consensus` is expected to commit on
with the same `[Transaction]`, if exists.
--->
### Desired Properties

> This standard specification provides secure layer to verify other chains' canonical headers,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Light clients must provide a secure algorithm to verify other chains' canonical headers,
```

we need to define canonical here

Reviewer: (you basically define it in the next paragraph, just reference that)

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

> using the existing `ConsensusState`. The higher level logics can be able to verify the substate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the existing `ConsensusState`. The higher level abstractions will then be able to verify subcomponents of the state
```

with the `CommitmentRoot` stored in the `ConsensusState`, which is guaranteed to be committed by
the other chain's consensus algorithm.

> * `Verifier`s are expected to reflect the behaviour of the full node which is running on the  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Verifier`s are expected to reflect the behaviour of the full node which is running the  
```

corresponding consensus algorithm. Given a `ConsensusState` and `[Message]`, if a full node
accepts the new `Header` generated with `Commit`, then the light client MUST also accept it,
and if a full node rejects, then the light client MUST also reject. The consensus algorithm

> ensures this correspondence. However light clients are not replaying the whole messages, so it

Reviewer: "The consensus algorithm ensures this correspondence" seems wrong, we can't define the correspondence without reasoning about both a consensus algorithm and a light client algorithm

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

is possible that the light clients' behaviour differs from the full nodes'. In this case, the
equivocation proof which proves the divergence between the `Verifier` and the full node will be
generated and submitted to the chain, as defined in
[ICS ?](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/issues/53), so the chain can safely deactivate the
light client.

### Technical Specification

#### Requirements

> * `get`, `set`, `Key`, `Identifier`, as defined in [ICS24](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/pull/75),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `get`, `set`, `Key`, and `Identifier` are as defined in [ICS24](..//ics-24-host-requirements).
```

> are used by the datagram handler.

Reviewer: Delete this line

> * `CommitmentRoot`, as defined in [ICS23](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/pull/74), is used by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `CommitmentRoot` is as defined in [ICS23](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/pull/74).
```

`ConsensusState`. The downstream logic can use it to verify whether key-value pairs are present
in the state or not.

#### Definitions

##### ConsensusState

> `ConsensusState` is a blockchain commit which contains an `CommitmentRoot` and the requisite

Reviewer: we have not defined "commit", and I'm not sure what you mean by it

state to verify future roots, stored in one blockchain to verify the state of the other.
Defined as

```go
type ConsensusState struct {
  Base VerifierBase
  Root CommitmentRoot
}
```
where
  * `Base` is a data used by `Consensus.Verifier` to verify `Header`s
  * `Root` is the `CommitmentRoot`, used to prove internal state

##### Header

> `Header` is a blockchain header which provides information to update `ConsensusState`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Header` is a blockchain header which provides information to update a `ConsensusState`,
```

submitted to one blockchain to update the stored `ConsensusState`.

> Defined as

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

```go
type Header struct {
  Proof HeaderProof
  Base Maybe[VerifierBase]
  Root CommitmentRoot
}
```
where
  * `Proof` is the commit proof used by `Consensus.Verifier` to be verified
  * `Base` is the new verify, if needed to be updated
  * `Root` is the new `CommitmentRoot` which will replace the existing one

##### Verifier

`Verifier` is a light client verifier proving `Header` depending on the `Commit`.

> It SHOULD prove far more efficiently than replaying `Consensus` logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the verifier SHOULD be far more computationally efficient than replaying `Consensus` logic
```

> for the given parent `Header` and the list of network messages, ideally in O(1) time.

Reviewer: O(1) with respect to what? I don't know what you mean here

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

Defined as

```go
type Verifier func(ConsensusState, Header) (Error|ConsensusState)
```

The detailed specification of `Verifier` is defined in [VERIFIER.md](./VERIFIER.md)

##### LightClient

LightClient is defined as
```go
type LightClient struct {
  Verifier Verifier
  ConsensusState ConsensusState
}
```

> where

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

  * `ConsensusState` is the root of trust providing the `VerifierBase`

>   * `Verifier` is the lightclient verification logic

Reviewer 6: What if we called `light consensus verifier` and `full state verifier`?

>   * `ConsensusState` is the root of trust providing the `VerifierBase`

Reviewer 6: Consider changing `root of trust` to `packet verification predicate`

The exact type of each fields are depending on the type of the actual consensus logic.

#### Subprotocols

> The chains MUST implement function `register` and `update`, as they form the `handleDatagram`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The chains MUST implement functions `register` and `update`, as they form the `handleDatagram`.
```

> Calling both functions MAY be permissionless.

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

##### Preliminaries

> `newID` is a function which generates a new `Identifier` for a `LightClient`, which MAY depending

Reviewer: which may what depending on the header?

Reviewer: and what header are we talking about?

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

> on the `Header`. The behaviour of `newID` is implementation specific. Possible implementations are:

Reviewer 7: shouldn't use "the" for `Header`,  as it makes it sound like there is a single `Header` per chain`. We should explicitly specify that it is one header per light client. 

Also whenever we use `may`, we need to specify when it applies or not, or link to something that does specify in which case a header is indeed required

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

> 

Reviewer 7: Add `.` after bullet points`

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

* Random bytestring
* Hash of the `Header`

> * Incrementing integer index, bigendian encoded

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Incrementing integer index, big-endian encoded
```

> `newID` MUST NOT return an `Identifier` which has already been generated, so it can be stateful to check

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`newID` **must not** return an `Identifier` which has already been generated, so it can be stateful to check
```

Reviewer 7: I don't think `stateful` is the correct adjective here

> the `Identifier`

Reviewer 7: Why carriage return here

`storekey` takes an `Identifier` and returns a `KVStore` compatible `Key`.

```coffee
newID = (header) -> # impl specific
storekey = (id) -> # impl specific
```

##### Register

> Registering new `LightClient` is done simply by submitting it to the `register` function,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Registering a new `LightClient` is done simply by submitting it to the `register` function,
```

as the chain automatically generates the `Identifier` for the `LightClient`.

```coffee

> register = (lightclient) ->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function register(ConsensusState initialState)
```

  id = newID()

>   set(storekey(id), register)

Reviewer: we don't need to have a `storekey` function, just use `set` directly

>   id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return id
```

let's be as explicit as possible

}
```

##### Update

Updating `LightClient` is done by submitting a new `Header`. The `Identifier` is used to point the

> stored `LightClient` that the logic will update. When the new `Header` is verifiable with

Reviewer 7: Do you mean verifiable or verified?

Reviewer: still needs to be addressed

> the stored `LightClient`'s `Verifier` and `ConsensusState`, then it SHOULD update the

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
the stored `LightClient`'s `Verifier` and `ConsensusState`, then it **should** update the
```

Reviewer 8: I think we settled with this https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119 as a standard on how to use should, must etc.

Reviewer 7: Oh ok nvm then, but should this be indicated somewhere? @cwgoes @mossid

Reviewer: It is indicated in ICS 1

> `LightClient` unless an additional logic intentionally blocks the updating process, for example,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`LightClient` unless an additional logic intentionally blocks the updating process (e.g.
```

waiting for the equivocation proof period.

```coffee

> update = (id, header) ->

Reviewer: Fix syntax, see above example

---

ics: 2
title: Consensus Verification
stage: draft
category: ibc-core

> requires: 23

Reviewer: also 24

required-by: 3
author: Juwoon Yun <joon@tendermint.com>, Christopher Goes <cwgoes@tendermint.com>
created: 2019-02-25

> modified: 2019-04-02

Reviewer: Update this

> modified: 2019-04-02

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modified: 2019-04-25
```

---

## Synopsis

> This standard specifies the properties that consensus algorithms of chains implementing IBC are

Reviewer: It also specifies the algorithms for creating a client instance now, right?

Author: Yes, updated

expected to satisfy. The properties are needed for efficient and safe verification in the higher
level protocol abstractions. The algorithm which uses these properties to verify substates of
another chain is referred to as a "light client".

## Specification

### Motivation

> `FullNode`s are procedures running a `Consensus`. Given a `([Transaction], Commit)`, a

Reviewer: This reads like definitions, not motivation.

This section should answer: Why do we need light clients? What properties do they provide to other parts of IBC?

Move these two paragraphs to definitions.

Author: Removed two paragraphs, the fullnode-lightclient correspondence is now described in VERIFIER.md

`FullNode` can compute the result `ConsensusState` that the `Consensus` is expected to commit on
with the same `[Transaction]`, if exists.

`Blockchain` defines required properties of the blockchain on the network. The implementors can
check whether the consensus that they are using is qualified to be connected to the network or
not. If not, they can modify the algorithm or wrap it with additional logic to make it
compatible with the specification. It also provides base layer for the protocol that the other
components can rely on.

### Desired Properties

> This standard specification provides secure layer to verify other chains' canonical headers,

Reviewer: I think we need to more clearly articulate that there is an *underlying* consensus process going on, which light clients are attempting to verify the output of in a way where it is very difficult to convince a light client that a different consensus transcript occurred (when it did not actually occur)

using the existing `ConsensusState`. The higher level logics can be able to verify the substate
with the `AccumulatorRoot` stored in the `ConsensusState`, which is guaranteed to be committed by
the other chain's consensus algorithm.

* Blockchains, defined as an infinite list of `Header` starting from a genesis `ConsensusState`,

> are linear; no conflicting `Header`s can be both validated, thus no past accumulator roots can

Reviewer 4: maybe add something about forks -> `are linear (no forks)` or list `forkfulness` as desired property?

be changed after they have been committed. Two `Header`s are conflicting when they both have the
same height in a blockchain but are not equal.

* Verifiers can verify future `Header`s using an existing `ConsensusState`. When the verifier
validates it, the verified header is in the canonical blockchain.

* `ConsensusState`s contains an accumulator root (ICS23) that the downstream logic can use to
verify whether key-value pairs are present in the state or not.

### Technical Specification

#### Definitions

##### ConsensusState

`ConsensusState` is a blockchain commit which contains an accumulator root and the requisite
state to verify future roots, stored in one blockchain to verify the state of the other.
Defined as

```go
type ConsensusState struct {
  Base VerifierBase

>   Root AccumulatorRoot

Reviewer: See https://github.com/cosmos/ics/pull/32#issuecomment-484568502

}
```
where
  * `Base` is a data used by `Consensus.Verifier` to verify `Header`s
  * `Root` is the `AccumuatorRoot`, used to prove internal state

##### Header

`Header` is a blockchain header which provides information to update `ConsensusState`,
submitted to one blockchain to update the stored `ConsensusState`.
Defined as

```go
type Header struct {
  Proof HeaderProof
  Base Maybe[VerifierBase]
  Root AccumulatorRoot
}
```
where
  * `Proof` is the commit proof used by `Consensus.Verifier` to be verified
  * `Base` is the new verify, if needed to be updated

>   * `Root` is the new `AccumulatorRoot` which will replace the existing one

Reviewer: See https://github.com/cosmos/ics/pull/32#issuecomment-484568502

##### Verifier

`Verifier` is a light client verifier proving `Header` depending on the `Commit`.
It is expected to prove far more efficiently than replaying `Consensus` logic
for the given parent `Header` and the list of network messages, idealy in O(1) time.
Defined as

```go
type Verifier func(ConsensusState, Header) (Error|ConsensusState)
```

##### Commit

*// Commit and Blockchain is not used inside the protocol, but for the understanding
of how does verifiers, cstates, headers work & generated. I think we should move these
to another paragraph, as the other types and functions are actually used by other icss*

`Commit` is a `Header` generating function which takes the previous `Header` with the messages
and returns the result.

```go
type Commit func(ConsensusState, [Message]) Header
```

##### Blockchain

Defined as blockchain consensus algorithm which generates valid `Header`s.

> It generatess a unique list of headers starting from a genesis `ConsensusState` with arbitrary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It generates a unique list of headers starting from a genesis `ConsensusState` with arbitrary
```

messages.

`Blockchain` is defined as
```go
type Blockchain struct {
  Verifier Verifier
  Genesis ConsensusState
  Commit Commit
}
```
where
  * `Verifier` is the lightclient verifier
  * `Genesis` is the genesis `ConsensusState`
  * `Commit` is the header generating function

> The headers generated from the `Blockchain` is expected to satisfy the followings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The headers generated from the `Blockchain` are expected to satisfy the followings:
```

1. The `Header`s have no more than one direct child

* Satisfied if: deterministic safety
* Possible violation scenario: validator double signing, chain reorganization (Nakamoto consensus)

2. The `Header`s eventually have at least one direct child

* Satisfied if: liveness, light-client verifier continuity
* Possible violation scenario: synchronised halt, incompatible hard fork

3. The `Header`s are generated from the `Commit`, which ensures valid transition of the state

* Satisfied if: correct block generation & state machine
* Possible violation scenario: invariant break, validator cartel

In these cases it is ensured that the `Verifier` works as intended.

> 

Reviewer: I still think we want to talk about safety in terms of the light client reflecting what the full nodes do

"A light client validates a header iff. validators came to consensus on it" is a stronger statement, and it encapsulates no more than one direct child (finality), at least one direct child (liveness) - since those are both properties of the consensus (e.g. Tendermint)

Author: Applied, also moved to VERIFIER.md

##### LightClient

LightClient is defined as
```go
type LightClient struct {
  Verifier Verifier
  ConsensusState ConsensusState
}
```
where
  * `ConsensusState` is the root of trust providing the `VerifierBase`
  * `Verifier` is the lightclient verification logic

The exact type of each fields are depending on the type of the actual consensus logic.

##### Functions

* `Height :: Blockchain -> Header -> Uint` returns the position of the header in the
  Blockchain's header list.

#### Requirements

Consensus verification requires the following accumulator primitives with datastructures and
properties as defined in ICS23:

* `AccumulatorRoot`

#### Subprotocols

##### Getter/Setter

> Identifiers are used to point the LightClients.

Reviewer 4: Why do you need many light clients? For doing upgrades?

Author: To connect with multiple chains, the subprotocols are defined at the perspective of the whole chain, not the individual lightclients stored on it. Maybe I should mention it in detail.

```go
function getLightClient(id :: Identifier) LightClient { /*impl specific*/ }

function setLightClient(id :: Identifier, lc :: LightClient) { /*impl specific*/ }
```

##### Register

> The method that the identifiers are given to the lightclients(`newLightClientID`)

Reviewer: Why? Is this necessary? The names don't need to be meaningful, I agree. Maybe it's easier if they're just sequence numbers or something.

is not defined by the protocol, rather depending on the implementation. Registering
a new LightClient is expected to be permissionless.

```go
type RegisterLightClient LightClient

> function register(register :: RegisterLightClient) Identifier {

Reviewer: Functions should be in Coffeescript. See ICS 1 - https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-1-ics-standard#pseudocode

> function register(register :: RegisterLightClient) Identifier {

Reviewer: We need to be clear that this is a datagram which can be submitted directly to the IBC handler

  id := newLightClientID()
  setLightClient(id, register)
  return id
}
```

##### Update

> Updating lightclient is done by submitting new header. The id is used to point the

Reviewer: We need to be clear that this is a datagram which can be submitted directly to the IBC handler

store lightclient that the logic will update. When the new header is verifiable with
the stored lightclient's verifier and consensus state, then it

```go
type UpdateLightClient struct {
  ID bytes
  Header Header
}

> function update(update :: UpdateLightClient) returns Maybe<Error> {

Reviewer: Functions should be in Coffeescript. See ICS 1 - https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-1-ics-standard#pseudocode

the other chain's consensus algorithm.

* `ValidityPredicate`s are expected to reflect the behaviour of the full node which is running the  
corresponding consensus algorithm. Given a `ConsensusState` and `[Message]`, if a full node
accepts the new `Header` generated with `Commit`, then the light client MUST also accept it,
and if a full node rejects it, then the light client MUST also reject it. The consensus algorithm
ensures this correspondence. However light clients are not replaying the whole messages, so it
is possible that the light clients' behaviour differs from the full nodes'. In this case, the
equivocation proof which proves the divergence between the `ValidityPredicate` and the full node will be
generated and submitted to the chain, as defined in
[ICS ?](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/issues/53), so that the chain can safely deactivate the
light client.

### Technical Specification

#### Requirements

* `get`, `set`, `Key`, and `Identifier` are as defined in [ICS24](../ics-24-host-requirements).
are used by the datagram handler.

* `CommitmentRoot` is as defined in [ICS23](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/pull/74).

> `ConsensusState`. The downstream logic can use it to verify whether key-value pairs are present

Reviewer: Grammar?

in the state or not.

> * `createClient`, `queryClient`, `updateClient`, `freezeClient`, `deleteClient` are as

Reviewer: Well, the function *definitions* are defined here - the function signatures are defined in ICS 25, yes

  ValidityPredicate ValidityPredicate
  ConsensusState ConsensusState
}
```
where
  * `ConsensusState` is the root of trust providing the `ValidityPredicateBase`
  * `ValidityPredicate` is the lightclient verification logic

The exact type of each fields are depending on the type of the actual consensus logic.

#### Subprotocols

The chains MUST implement functions `register` and `update`, as they form the `handleDatagram`.
Calling both functions MAY be permissionless.

##### Preliminaries

`newID` is a function which generates a new `Identifier` for a `LightClient`, which MAY depending
on the `Header`. The behaviour of `newID` is implementation specific. Possible implementations are:

* Random bytestring
* Hash of the `Header`
* Incrementing integer index, big-endian encoded

`newID` MUST NOT return an `Identifier` which has already been generated.

`storekey` takes an `Identifier` and returns a `KVStore` compatible `Key`.

##### Create

Creating a new `LightClient` is done simply by submitting it to the `createClient` function,
as the chain automatically generates the `Identifier` for the `LightClient`.

```coffee
function createClient(info)
  id = newID()

>   set(storekey(id), info)

Reviewer: Let's use actual keys per ICS 24

  set(freezekey(id), false)
  return id
}
```

##### Query

Clients can be queried by their identifier.

```coffee
function queryClient(id)

>   if get(freezekey(id)) then

Reviewer: Let's use actual keys per ICS 24

waiting for the equivocation proof period.

```coffee
function updateClient(id, header)
  assert(!freezekey(id))

  stored = get(storekey(id))
  assert(stored /= nil)

  state = stored.ConsensusState
  pred = stored.ValidityPredicate

  assert(pred(state, header))

  state.Root = header.Root
  if header.Base? then state.Base = header.Base

  set(storekey(id), {state, pred})

  return nil
}
```

##### Freeze

A client can be frozen, in case when an equivocation proof for the client is provided.
The client information SHOULD NOT be deleted from the state. To completely remove a client,
one must call `deleteClient` defined below.

```coffee
function freezeClient(id, header1, header2)
  assert(!get(freezekey(id)))
  stored = get(storekey(id))

>   // TODO

Reviewer: What is "TODO"? We just need to mark the client as frozen.
